today we're bench pressing and I've got
a guest from the UK his name is olle and
he's one of the strongest men in the
world in the under 90 kg category this
guy's a beast and he's here to train
with us and he's a strong man the strong
men don't bench press in their
competition however a lot of my strong
men I still will strengthen their
horizontal push pattern so I will give
bench press in their programming just
like my powerlifters who bench press I
will still make them do shoulder
pressing so today OE is not used to
doing bench press especially the way
that I teach it but I'm going to
introduce it to his program and we're
going to see how that goes you get to
see the techniques that I teach and
hopefully it works for you too let's go
first things first what we're going to
do is check out his rack height so uh
judging by what he looks like he's not
tall his arms aren't really long um I
don't want that rack height to be super
high the first error that people make is
having the rack height too high they
have to protract their shoulders to get
it off so we want to keep the shoulders
back and down with this technique so the
rack high I would rather you have to
press that weight off than have to shrug
that weight down most commercial gyms
don't have a a setup like this look how
many um adjustable settings we have
we've got heaps because this is a
competition spec bench but most
commercial gyms have two hooks one
that's too high and one that's too
low not ideal but my recommendation is
to put it on the one that's too low okay
so it might be a little bit too low to
your preference but
you'd rather that than it being too high
if it's too high it's going to take you
out of position empty barbell let's have
a look step by step with a que step one
sit at the edge of the bench so that
when you lay down you don't whack your
head on the barbell lay down good step
two slide back so your head is Off the
Bench step three bring the feet back and
get up onto the balls of the feet Okay
the reason why we slide back to get in
this position is because if you didn't
slide back like that you wouldn't get
the feet as far back back I really want
to wedge those feet in so now that the
feet are back on the balls of the feet I
want him to push his heels downwards all
right you're going to feel that in your
back when that happens pushing the feel
feet down heels downwards then I'm going
to touch the ground I look for a 45°
angle of the sole of the foot pushing
the heels downwards grab the bar now
with that downwards pressure of the heel
he's now going to slide into position so
that he's ideally I want his eyes to be
behind the barbell the barbell in line
with his mouth so it's not if it's in
line with his eyes he's going to be
reaching too far back when you reach too
far back it takes your shoulders out of
position barbell in line with the mouth
that's perfect from here shoulder blades
back and down towards his back pockets
and heels down and unrack give me 20
reps good so this is really good
technique is fine it's only an empty
barbell easy to do good technique um it
can't be perfect here that's totally
fine let's just get this warm all right
and then we'll start adding weight and
then you're going to see uh his body
change when there's weight and the
techniques that I'm going to use to help
him shift the heavy loads I'm definitely
not as strong as Ollie today but I will
be benching alongside so I'm going to do
the exact same techniques slide back
feet back heels down slide into
position and 20 reps
now we add
[Music]
white that's the first time I've seen
Ollie get in that setup and actually
he's quite coordinated um some people
can't achieve that Arch position and if
you can't achieve that Arch position
arching your upper back is paired with
retraction and depression of the
shoulder blades or shoulder blades back
and down so some people can't arch their
upper back like that so if they can't
arch their upper back like that their
shoulders won't be in that right
position so because his shoulders are in
the right position I'm comfortable with
him using a wide grip so for those who
can't Arch it's not comfortable to use a
wide grip that's what you end up looking
like so if that's the case you end up
having uh high risk of injury for your
shoulders or peeg tears and things like
that but for him I am comfortable for
him to use a wider than normal grip the
widest legal grip in a powerlifting
competition is index finger on the outer
ring of that power lifting bar with
OE he can do that because he's
coordinated and he's got great mobility
and a lot of great strength but it might
be slightly a little bit too wide so
maybe we'll go a little bit inside of
that but never go outside of that line
the main reason we don't go outside of
that line in powering competition you're
just not allowed and in the gym if you
go outside of that your hands are going
to get really really close to this rack
and this is how you hurt yourself so
don't go wider than that line let's go
slide back feet back so he's going with
uh his ring finger on the line so that's
I think that's a good grip for him if
you don't have this Mobility I'd say go
even closer than that but for him he's
looking good feet are back heels are
down come back a little bit further I
say feet back a little bit more yeah now
push the heels down good now slide
forward barbell come back in line with
his mouth come back a little bit good
eyes behind the bar okay shoulder blads
back and down heels down take a big
breath and hold it hold your breath five
reps down and
up
good very good technique um not everyone
looks like that when they bench so it's
going to be easy
day slide back feet back balls of the
feet heels down I do hold it on the
widest Le of grip but I'm quite strong
here here and I've been doing it for a
while so I'm very comfortable in this
position favorite ways to warm up is to
start light lots and lots and lots of
reps as we go more and more weight we
reduce the Reps so first set was 60 kg
well empty barbell which is 20 kilos he
did 20 reps then we did the first plate
which was 60 kg five reps uh we've got
80 kilos on here so probably do four
reps now let's get to go
slide back more more more more more head
right off the bench head right slide
back good good feet back on the balls
pushing the heels down slide into
position pull the shoulder blades eyes
behind the bar shoulder blades back and
down take a big breath and hold it for
reps shoulders back and down heels down
harder heels down
harder
good on the next set I'm going to make
him slow down
okay because I'll tell you what happens
when you go really really heavy it's
hard to move that fast when you're
really really heavy so people warm up on
the light weights really fast because
it's so easy but then it gets heavy and
it's like oh I've got to stabilize this
so what I try and teach people to do is
think about how he how slow you're going
to move on the top weight and use that
on the warm-up weights uh every set
leading up to that top weight because
I'm not teaching him how to press 80 kgs
he can already do that without even
having to think about it I want to teach
him the skill of lifting a really heavy
weight strength is a skill and this is
where it starts it starts every single
time you touch a barbell all of the
warm-up reps are a good opportunity for
us to practice the perfect reps so have
a look at how I do it and that's how I
demonstrate with olle is uh watch the
Speed that I'm going to do it at and I
want you to focus on that speed and do
that for your next step
so I still push it up up pretty fast I
say down with control up with intent
another mistake that people make is
pushing the weight up really really fast
trying to be explosive the problem with
that is a lot of the times they push it
so fast that it takes their shoulder
blades out of position so think about
keeping the shoulders back and just like
imagine you're standing out of a chair
you don't jump up in the air you stand
with the right amount of force that's
needed to get that weight up same here
explosive but always under
control I like to bench press with a
belt and with wrist
wraps this is stuff that you can use in
competition it's not
cheating um and not everyone needs to
use it a lot of people will use the r
wraps in competition but not everyone
uses a
belt
now this is when I recommend using I'll
ask you now how does it feel how does
your back feel when you're doing that
Arch say it feels like my back's
cramping a little bit yep in position so
that's not uncommon especially when it's
the first time you're doing it some
people experience back pain when they're
doing that Arch most people it's arching
like this is a completely normal
position that that our spines can
achieve without pain it doesn't mean
that everyone can do it without pain so
for those that it hurts first thing I
like to do and even cramping like that
this is where I like to use a belt cuz
what a belt does is it teaches us how to
push our ABS into uh into the belt and
support our spine so a lot of the times
simply by adding a belt it can reduce a
lot of that discomfort on the spine now
here's the thing if it doesn't and it
still hurts then I'm going to make him
stop arching because I don't want you to
push through pain I never make anyone
that I work with push through pain so if
arching hurts your back just don't do it
flatten your feet don't bring your feet
back and and don't Arch and if you don't
Arch don't use a wide grip okay so let's
have a look what belt looks and feels
like for Ollie yeah we might as well put
it all on so olle uses elbow sleeves in
his strong man competition they're
completely legal um and they just add a
little bit of warmth for the elbow joint
so let's put them on next thing is a
wrist wrap so a few things to think
about with the wrist wrap if you have a
look at how he's done it what we need to
do if you look at the wrist there right
you want to make sure it's going over
that joint it needs to go over that
joint a lot of people put it under under
there and they can still move their hand
that defeats the purpose of having the
wrist wrap so it's a little bit
uncomfortable but that's how you really
support that wrist okay 100 kilos on the
bar three
reps slide back feet back balls of the
feet push the heels down and maintain
that downwards pressure slide into
position eyes behind the bar breathing
breathing breathing before we unrack we
take a big breath and hold it three reps
hold your breath control control down
drive it up good control down drive it
up one more control down drive it up
excellent how did that feel with the
belt felt good it felt like it was solid
um locked in didn't cramp at all
anything no cramping so that's a very
simple solution uh some people it may
not be a solution some people it might
still be uncomfortable or it might still
hurt your spine so if it hurts your
spine which most people it won't it's a
completely safe exercise to achieve but
some people it might cause discomfort on
your spine and if that's the case don't
Arch but for him uh and for me it really
solves that problem straight
away one small thing that I noticed
about O's technique is the so of his
foot was about 90° so that means his
feet are a little bit too far back what
I want is for the the Sol of his foot to
be about 45° so that's going to make the
movement a little bit less aggressive on
his back when you feet are too far back
and there's discomfort that's a really
quick fix is don't bring it back as fast
so 45° for the so of the foot that's the
goal all right let's
go we've gone up to 120 kg now and we're
going to reduce it by another rep so
we're going to do two reps here so feet
back but we're going to not go as
far heels down slide into position eyes
behind the bar shoulders back and down
take a big breath and hold it shoulders
back and down control that way down two
reps heels down Drive heels down Drive
good looking good okay so warm up
increments he's strong so I know um that
he's a really strong guy and you can
tell that by looking at him but why
don't you tell us what's the most you've
ever
benched I haven't actually maxed bench
since I was about 17 back then it was
about 180 um I did a 180 incline bench a
few weeks ago but I mainly do overhead
press I do things like log press strict
log press like I said a lot of overhead
pressing so what's your strongest strict
overhead press strongest strict overhead
press is 150 log but I've not really
pushed it too much so strict is what I
ask for because I know that a lot of
strong men they use their legs and that
doesn't apply here um we can only do a
strict press here so that's why that's
more relative to what we're doing so if
he can strict overhead press 150 it can
definitely do a bench press of 150 and a
lot more everyone's horizontal push
pattern is stronger than their vertical
push pattern so I know that I could
really take into 150 kg with no problem
so with Ollie we're doing 20 kg jumps
that's totally fine the rest in between
these sets starts with not much rest so
from empty barbell to 60 he's not
fatigued so I'll give him a minute rest
and then we go a minute and a half then
2 minutes 2 and a half 3 minutes right
now he can still take you know two to 3
minutes rest between these sets because
it's quite easy but then when we get to
the top sets we'll start extending that
rest period out to maybe five or even
six minutes uh depending on how heavy we
go if we go over 150 160 180 I'll
probably take him to 6 to 8 minutes rest
but we'll
[Music]
see feeling good 140 Kg on the bar and
we've just disc discussed that this is
going to be the last 20 kg jump so as we
said his overhead press trict is 150 so
that's going to be next so 140 so we're
doing 20 kilo jumps now we're going to
go 140 150 160 so a lot of people might
think that's a lot of warmup sets um
well actually it's not fatiguing it's
actually stimulating so what I'm going
to do is not make him do 140 for 10 reps
or anything like that it's just one rep
so that he can feel that weight and then
150 kg so that it can feel that weight
I'm anticipating that he will get over
180 kg this weight isn't that fatiguing
for him but what happens is when we're
introducing a new technique if you try
and take jumps that are too big it's
hard to maintain the technique so it's
not just about he's warm like he's warm
enough to go straight to 160 now but we
don't know if his technique is going to
be able to handle it what happens is
when you start getting heavier and
heavier weights your body goes into
safety mode and you start really
Contracting so much of your muscles
which can take you out of position so we
take smaller incremental increases as we
get closer to really heavy weights which
is what we're doing
now control heels down control Drive
good now what you're going to notice is
I don't have to give him cues anymore
we've done all of the queuing so this is
an important tip for the coaches out
there we've done all of the queuing uh
for the lightweight when it's really
easy and he can really think about what
I'm saying to him but as it gets heavier
and heavier it can be distracting if I
give him too many cues now so all of the
queuing is done now his technique is
great and now if I do give him a Quee it
might be one thing at a time but
typically I like to stay quiet from now
on so now that I'm getting heavy
I'm going to call on someone who knows
how to unrack to help me stay in
position a lot of the times when you
unrack yourself it's easy to take
yourself out of position and for me
position is very important so whenever I
have a spotter with me I'm always going
to use them 150 on the
bar
control Drive
good feedback um I noticed that he
touches quite high on his chest
um which is fine but I think it looked
like he'd be better if he brought the
bar down a little bit lower so
especially with an arch with a bench
press Sometimes When We Touch a little
bit lower it allows us to tuck the
elbows a little bit more and reach a
higher position of the chest which is
safer on the shoulders when we tuck the
elbows a little bit more but it's also
easier because it's higher on the chest
and it doesn't travel as far uh feedback
that he got is it felt comfortable so
we'll stay there very minor adjustment
um but something that I like to look for
is the angle of the upper arm is you
know roughly about 45° not too tucked if
you go too tucked it's too much triceps
and you don't get to use your PEC going
too flared puts your PEC at a really big
stretch which is good for building
muscle but when you're Shifting the
heaviest loads the more stretched the
muscle is the weaker it actually becomes
and that's where flared elbows at a big
stretch with heavy loads can cause Peck
injury
so that's why we like to put the peck at
a mid-range the best way to do mid-range
roughly about 45° for the upper arm
angle so not too tucked not too flared
right in the middle when the goal is to
shift the heaviest loads for me I'm
going to do 160 kg and this is going to
be my top weight for the day I don't
train one rep Maxes all the time
actually it's very rare most of the
strength work comes from three rep range
and up so uh that's what I really like
to train for most of my time so right
now 160 kilg maybe I can do sets of five
we'll see uh it's been a while um but
again I'm going to get my spotter to
come in safety first help keep me in
position to unrack um and I'll go for
five reps
beautiful that felt
comfortable
um I probably had I don't know maybe a
rep or two in the tank I don't always go
to fail with strength work it's better
to not go to fail uh and actually with
most of the work when you're doing heavy
weights with compound movements I'll
always prescribe to leave a couple of
reps in reserve uh if I took this to
fail I wouldn't be able to do a second
set of five um
my energy levels I would I would fatigue
so the second set would be reduced
quality so now by Saving reps in the
tank I will be able to do another set of
five after this 160 on the bar
breathe in breae in shoulders back hard
heels down
hard hit lower on your
sternum
nice that look really clean nice some
people like to do touch and go reps and
some people like to pause in
powerlifting you have to pause so that's
why typically that's how I like to train
uh but with Ollie he doesn't do power
lifting so he can he's got the choice of
either and usually when I'm teaching
someone for the first time I give them
the option
sometimes I like a pause because it
teaches people to stay tight under load
when you do the touch and go technique a
lot of people try and use momentum and
bounce the bar now when you get heavy
weights like that it's not a good idea
to bounce the bar or try and use the
move the weight with momentum because
bouncing the bar and moving with
momentum can switch your muscles off you
don't want any of your muscles to be
switched off underloads like this so
Ollie just asked he just said to me um
is it better to to user pause and I said
sometimes how did it feel and he said it
actually felt good I agree it looked
good and if you had to look at the speed
of that compared to the
150 that looked cleaner even though the
150 you slightly did a pause but I think
it looked cleaner because the 150 was
the first pause he did 140 was touch and
go 150 was paus so when you change the
technique like that it's a different
technique but he had one rep practice at
that so something I'm going to make sure
is he does that pause for the next set
and the next set
so if he was going for his top Set uh
and he was practicing with pauses all
the way up and he tried to do a touch
and go afterwards I'd say don't do that
you got to warm up the way that you're
going to perform that top set so now
we've agreed the pause is going to be
the one that he does I think with heavy
weights like this I just think it is
more comfortable even though it seems to
be a harder
technique I going to do a
piss you going to follow me
now he gets two goes in a row because
that was my top set that was a working
set and I'm going to take eight minutes
rest whereas olle is at a point where
he's probably doing 5 minutes rest
between these sets so that's why he gets
to go
first take good time chisel your
shoulder blades into the
bench squeeze him in grip him into the
bench grip him in grip him in grip him
in shoulders back shoulders back shers
back shers back good heels down heels
down heels down Drive
yeah
good really nice
strong hi want to give us an on make
guess appearance yeah what's up it's not
cute why you cute well I am cute
good on
good thanks um for those who don't know
this D J
so we just had a bit of a a change of
scenery so God was spotting before his
last stronger but Denny J I'm just more
used to her unrack she's been doing it
for me for the last 10 yearsor
Al no Alex is the strongest in Australia
so happens every time yeah yeah yeah
yeah we'll put up another video of us uh
showing you the Dynamics of this
next but actually that was good so
that's two sets of five um still had
more reps in reserve and I'm going to do
a third set of that good one control
control Fe back a little bit more good
down
hard take your time should B in hard
should B in hard down hard should bits
in hard
control
good nice close yeah you did felt comt
yeah it was strong um if you have a look
at the bar path it was slow this is it's
a new exercise for him he's
unfamiliar so um I know that he wants to
go heavier and I know it looks like he
can go heavier but what I would like is
to do that again clean up before we go
up because now we're um approaching
weights that can tell your PEX uh if
it's if something wrong happens if it
goes offline very slightly um that's
where injuries happen so that's why I
don't wanted to say yeah that was easy
enough um next time do it better and
we'll add weight that's going to change
it a lot so therefore I'm going to make
him do that same weight again um and do
it better remember this you need to earn
the right to add weight to the bar okay
so from a coacher standpoint um if if
you're using a lightweight to warm up
and the technique's wrong I wouldn't say
change a technique and I'm going to add
more weight on and then practice that
new technique with the new weight that's
the worst way of doing it because when
you add more weight to the bar it's a
slightly it feels different in your
hands uh and it won't fix the technique
so earn the right to add weight to the
bar that's what Ollie's going to do and
we're going to repeat this after about I
think anywhere between 6 to8
minutes
y very nice yeah good day for it he
thank you thank you um that's my
benching done off to accessories uh
before I do accessories we're going to
go back to olle and make him do that 180
better olle is a pyup lifter if you've
ever seen him left uh he brings a very
big intensity with him which is awesome
and it's really important for strength
athletes at the highest level to be able
to get that space mentally however when
we're learning a new technique that can
interfere with the thought process that
goes behind the lifting actually if you
have a look at his intensity maybe
you'll see it in the video I could see
his face but you guys couldn't but he
really switched on then and I think that
sometimes that level of arousal can
interfere with the technique so actually
when I'm teaching people for the first
time I try and keep that pyup process
down um to just focus on the technique
for him that weight moved really easily
for him to do 180 kilos the first time
we benched in years is insane it's
really unheard of so he's super strong
we know that um but at the same time he
will get even stronger and he'll lift a
heavier weight
if we just refine that technique too
much arousal can interfere with good
technique right now it's not about how
much you can lift it's about good
technique so we'll try that on the next
one we'll try and I still want to focus
you know what I mean but don't go you
know what I mean no aggression so the
next thing you did as well if you watch
How I Do It um compared to what you're
doing is I grip my shoulders into the
bench right so you kind of go back back
and then you go here
I
go right
okay and I'm gripping my shoulder blades
in there right I really wedge it in
place something that I noticed you've
got as well is that light shining right
in your face
so it's like you get one side in
first then absolutely take your time
chisel it in don't just come in with the
shoulders in and sit they won't be in
put one shoulder in grip it in and then
move the other one in grip it in
and then we unwrap big
Focus take your time for the set
up feet
back heels down
hard take your time heels down hard
squeeze those in grip it in grip it in
grip it in take a big breath shoulders
back hard shoulders back hard shoulders
back hard control Drive yes
je did you see the difference man see
how good that was so that was perfect
line and it just it really pinged up
[Music]
um now here's the thing with learning a
new
technique I know it's going to upset oie
when I say this but I want to bring it
down and do reps now I know he wants to
beat 180 um and I know he will but not
today yeah not today uh he could you
just saw how easy that was uh but what I
want to do is like he could probably do
a definitely 190 and then probably even
200 um but 200 might be hard and he
might grind through 200 and when you
grind through one R max weight that's
what takes you out of position and
that's where we increase risk of injury
not here we don't want to do that now we
don't need to do that it's just a
training session and he's training to be
the world's strongest man in the 90 kg
category um so no injuries so what we're
going to do is drop the weight probably
down to maybe 140 and I'm just going to
make him rep it and we're going to
refine that pattern with a lower load
and then he'll probably jump up week
after week like let's just sales to
program him to do a bench flge I could
go 3x 8 on 140 on week one and then 150
for 8s and 160 for eights and then we
drop it and we' probably come back to
test 180 and we' probably be able to do
that for five reps so I don't care for
200 for one I think he's got the
strength to do 200 for five so instead
of going for 200 for 1 now we're going
to go for 200 for 5 later on in the year
stay tuned we're going to do a back down
set just so that you can see the
difference in movement when we drop it
down we'll probably just take a plate
off and do high rep sets now that's so
good Ollie isn't sure for Oliver it's
sure for olivander just kidding it's all
of now what we're doing eight reps um
now I'm going to tell you a secret um
not for everybody just for those who
want to get strong hold your breath for
the whole set wait
hold your breath for the whole set which
means before we unrack take a big
breath and then we exhale on completion
of the set when you exhale he can lose a
little bit of position under heavy loads
uh that makes the movement harder so if
you want to be really really really
strong hold your back for the whole set
all right Ollie let's do it okay
control let's go go down back
down back shoulders back shoulders back
shoulders back let's go control heels
down
drive drive
good one more hold your breath five easy
six two more seven nice how easy is that
man yeah easy good yeah that look us
beautiful you're in the group
all right so that was a successful bench
press session as you can see 180 kg was
very easy for OE but that's how I like
to do it when we're teaching someone a
new technique is not actually maxed out
always leave reps in reserve especially
when we're dealing with weights that
heavy 180 kg is definitely enough uh to
cause a big injury if something wrong
happens so we always want to leave reps
in reserve uh top set of 180 you
actually did a couple of sets of 180
very comfortable and then two sets of
eight on 40 uh we're going to do a whole
bunch of accessory exercises which this
video will be too long if we showed you
the entire session but maybe we will be
back another day for accessories and
show you how we like to plan the entire
day hope you enjoyed click subscribe
follow all the good stuff and follow
olle I'm going to put his uh Instagram
page go give him a follow support him
for the World's Strongest Man Journey uh
his goal is to be number one on the
planet in the 90 kgam class and look at
the size of this guy uh you know I'm 100
kgs of course he's not 90 kg now he's
about 100 kg uh but he's a ball of
muscle and he's a really strong dude so
hope you enjoy the session guys